>> Ifill: HIGH STAKES FOR
OBAMACARE.
A SUPREME COURT DIVIDED OVER THE
INTERPRETATION OF FOUR WORDS
THAT COULD DETERMINE THE FATE OF
THE HEALTH CARE LAW.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY.
THE BOSTON BOMBING TRIAL BEGINS.
OPENING ARGUMENTS PAINT A CASE
CENTERING ON THE INFLUENCE OF A
MILITANT OLDER BROTHER.
>> Ifill: PLUS, WE SIT DOWN WITH
GENERAL JOHN ALLEN, THE MAN THE
PRESIDENT HAS TAPPED TO TAKE
DOWN THE ISLAMIC STATE.
>> Woodruff: AND, THE CHALLENGES
OF COMING HOME.
HOW FELE VMAETERANS STRUGGLE TO
FIND JOBS AND ESCAPE POVERTY
AFTER THEIR TIME IN THE SERVICE
HAS ENDED.
>> THAT FIRST TWO TO THREE YEARS
AFTER GETTING OUT WAS THE WORST.
I WAS SCARED TO TELL PEOPLE I
HAD JUST GOTTEN OUT OF THE
MILITARY BECAUSE I DIDN'T KNOW
IF THAT WAS THE REASON WHY THEY
WEREN'T HIRING ME BECAUSE THEY
THOUGHT I PROBABLY HAD PTSD OR
SOMETHING.
IT WAS SO HARD.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
HEALTH CARE LAW HUNG IN THE
BALANCE TODAY, BEFORE THE
SUPREME COURT.
AT ISSUE: WHETHER TAX SUBSIDIES
TO HELP PAY PREMIUMS, APPLY
NATIONWIDE.
MOST STATES RELY ON A FEDERALLY
RUN INSURANCE EXCHANGE, BUT
PLAINTIFFS' ATTORNEY MICHAEL
CARVIN SAID CONGRESS MEANT TO
LIMIT SUBSIDIES TO STATES WITH
THEIR OWN EXCHANGES.
>> I OBVIOUSLY BELIEVE OUR CASE
IS VERY COMPELLING SO I'M
HOPEFUL AND CONFIDENT THAT THE
COURT WILL RECOGNIZE THE MERITS
OF OUR STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
AND NOT LET THE IRS REWRITE THE
PLAIN LANGUAGE OF THE STATUTE.
NOW THAT IT'S THE LAW OF THE
LAND, WE NEED IT TO BE NEUTRALLY
AND FAIRLY INTERPRETED AND
THAT'S EXACTLY WHY WE'RE HERE TO
VINDICATE THE RULE OF LAW.
>> Woodruff: U.S. SOLICITOR
GENERAL DONALD VERRILLI ARGUED
THE GOVERNMENT'S CASE, WITH
FORMER ACTING SOLICITOR GENERAL
NEAL KATYAL IN SUPPORT.
>> WHEN THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
RUNS AN EXCHANGE IT IS SUCH AN
EXCHANGE, JUST LIKE A STATE ONE,
AND SHOULD BE ELIGIBLE FOR THE
SUBSIDIES.
AND WHEN MR. VERRILLI TOOK THE
PODIUM I THINK YOU SAW THAT
HEAVILY HAMMERED.
THE IDEA THAT THIS ISN'T AN
AMBIGUOUS PROVISION.
THIS IS A PROVISION THAT
EVERYONE UNDERSTOOD AT THE TIME
TO PROVIDE SUBSIDIES TO BOTH
FEDERAL AND STATE EXCHANGES.
>> Woodruff: THE HIGH COURT IS
EXPECTED TO DECIDE THE CASE IN
LATE JUNE.
WE'LL LOOK AT TODAY'S ARGUMENTS
IN DETAIL, AFTER THE NEWS
SUMMARY.
>> Ifill: THERE'S NEW CONFUSION
OVER SAME-SEX MARRIAGE IN
ALABAMA.
LAST NIGHT, THE STATE'S HIGHEST
COURT ORDERED PROBATE JUDGES TO
UPHOLD A BAN ON GAY MARRIAGE,
DESPITE A FEDERAL COURT RULING
THAT IT'S UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
TODAY, SOME COUNTIES STOPPED
ISSUING LICENSES TO GAY COUPLES.
>> Woodruff: THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT CONFIRMED TODAY IT
WILL NOT FILE CIVIL RIGHTS
CHARGES IN THE KILLING OF
MICHAEL BROWN.
HIS DEAT LASH,T SUMMER IN
FERGUSON, MISSOURI, TOUCHED OFF
NATIONAL PROTESTS.
THEN-POLICE OFFICER DARREN
WILSON SAID HE FEARED FOR HIS
OWN LIFE WHEN HE SHOT BROWN, AND
TODAY'S REPORT BACKED THAT
ACCOUNT.
ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC HOLDER.
>> I RECOGNIZE THAT THE FINDINGS
IN OUR REPORT MAY LEAVE SOME TO
WONDER HOW THE DEPARTMENT'S
FINDINGS CAN DIFFER SO SHARPLY
FROM SOME OF THE INITIAL, WIDELY
REPORTED ACCOUNTS OF WHAT
TRANSPIRED.
I WANT TO EMPHASIZE THAT THE
STRENGTH AND INTEGRITY OF
AMERICA'S JUSTICE SYSTEM HAS
ALWAYS RESTED ON ITS ABILITY TO
DELIVER IMPARTIAL RESULTS.
>> Woodruff: THE DEPARTMENT ALSO
OFFICIALLY RELEASED A SCATHING
REPORT THAT FOUND SYSTEMIC
RACIAL BIAS IN THE FERGUSON
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND COURTS.
>> Ifill: THE HEAD OF MEXICO'S
NOTORIOUS ZETAS DRUG CARTEL,
OMAR TREVINO MORALES, IS BEHIND
BARS TONIGHT.
POLICE AND SOLDIERS ARRESTED HIM
EARLY TODAY AT HIS HOME OUTSIDE
MONTERREY.
MORALES IS WANTED IN THE U.S.
AND MEXICO ON CHARGES OF DRUG
TRAFFICKING, KIDNAPPING AND
MURDER.
IT'S THE SECOND ARREST OF A
MEXICAN CARTEL LEADER IN LESS
THAN A WEEK.
>> Woodruff: THE LATEST
NEGOTIATIONS OVER IRAN'S NUCLEAR
FUTURE HAVE WRAPPED UP, WITH NO
BREAKTHROUGH.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
SAID TODAY THERE ARE STILL
"SIGNIFICANT GAPS."
AND, A SENIOR U.S. OFFICIAL
DIALED BACK HOPES FOR A
FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT BY MONTH'S
END.
>> Ifill: RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN WEIGHED IN
PUBLICLY TODAY, FOR THE FIRST
TIME, ON THE MURDER OF BORIS
NEMTSOV.
THE OPPOSITION LEADER WAS GUNNED
DOWN NEAR THE KREMLIN ON FRIDAY
NIGHT, HOURS AFTER HE DENOUNCED
PUTIN'S POLICIES IN UKRAINE.
IN TELEVISED REMARKS TO INTERIOR
MINISTRY EMPLOYEES, PUTIN
CONDEMNED THE KILLING.
>> ( translated ): THE MOST
SERIOUS ATTENTION MUST BE PAID
TO HIGH-PROFILE CRIMES,
INCLUDING THOSE WITH A POLITICAL
MOTIVE.
WE MUST FINALLY RID RUSSIA OF
THE DISGRACE AND TRAGEDY OF THE
KINDS OF THINGS WE RECENTLY SAW
AND EXPERIENCED.
I MEAN THE AUDACIOUS MURDER OF
BORIS NEMTSOV IN THE VERY CENTER
OF THE CAPITAL.
>> Ifill: THERE HAVE BEEN NO
ARRESTS IN THE CASE.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, THE SENATE FAILED TO
OVERRIDE PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VETO
OF THE KEYSTONE PIPELINE BILL.
SUPPORTERS OF THE PROJECT FELL
FIVE VOTES SHORT.
MEANWHILE, THE PRESIDENT SIGNED
THE HOMELAND SECURITY FUNDING
BILL.
IT PASSED AFTER REPUBLICANS GAVE
UP ON ROLLING BACK HIS
IMMIGRATION POLICIES.
>> Ifill: WALL STREET GAVE
GROUND TODAY, ON PROFIT-TAKING.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 106 POINTS, ENDING BELOW
18,100.
THE NASDAQ FELL 12 POINTS,
AND THE S&P 500 SLIPPED NINE.
>> Woodruff: AND, FINALLY, THE
WRECK OF THE GIANT JAPANESE
BATTLESHIP "MUSASHI" HAS BEEN
FOUND, 70 YEARS AFTER IT WAS
SUNK.
MICROSOFT CO-FOUNDER PAUL ALLEN
AND HIS RESEARCH TEAM SAY THEY
LOCATED WHAT'S LEFTF TH OE
VESSEL, OFF THE PHILIPPINES.
U.S. PLANES SANK THE "MUSASHI"
IN OCTOBER 1944.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR.
THE SUPREME COURT WEIGHS THE
FUTURE OF OBAMACARE.
THE BOSTON BOMBING TRIAL BEGINS.
GENERAL JOHN ALLEN ON THE
COALITION TO STOP ISIS.
FEMALE VETS, BACK HOME, BUT
OVERLOOKED.
AND, THE CONTROVERSY OVER
SECRETARY CLINTON'S EMAILS.
>> Woodruff: A MAJOR CHALLENGE
TO THE HEALTH CARE LAW AT THE
SUPREME COURT.
NEWSHOUR CONTRIBUTOR MARCIA
COYLE OF THE "NATIONAL LAW
JOURNAL" WAS THERE.
THIS IS THE DAY EVERYONE'S BEEN
WAITING FOR.
>> BIG CASE, JUDY.
MARCIA, WE KNOW THE COURT HAS
WEIGHED IN ON THE
CONSTITUTIONALITY OF THE
HEALTHCARE LAW.
REMINDS US WHO BROUGHT THIS
COMPLAINT AND WHAT IS IT ABOUT?
>> THIS IS WHAT WE CALL A
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION CASE,
INVOLVES THE JUSTICES LOOKING AT
A PROVISION IN THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT AND DECIDING WHAT IT
MEANS, WHAT CONGRESS INTENDED
AND THE CONTEXT AND TEXT OF THE
LAW ITSELF.
THIS CHALLENGE TO IT WAS BROUGHT
BY FOUR VIRGINIA RESIDENTS WHO
CLAIM THAT THERE IS A PROVISION
IN THE LAW THAT SAYS FEDERAL
SUBSIDIES OR TAX CREDITS FOR LOW
AND MIDDLE INCOME AMERICANS ARE
AVAILABLE ONLY ON EXCHANGES
ESTABLISHED BY THE STATE.
THEY CLAIM THAT DOES NOT INCLUDE
SUBSIDIES FOR PURCHASEONS
EXCHANGES THAT THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT CREATES.
THE ACT ALLOWS THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT TO STEP IN AND CREATE
EXCHANGES WHEN A DATE OPTS NOT
TO.
AS YOU PROBABLY KNOW, ONLY 16
STATES HAVE CREATED THEIR OWN
EXCHANGES.
34 STATES OPTED FOR THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT TO COME IN AND SET UP
AN EXCHANGE.
>> Woodruff: SO IT SOUNDS LIKE
THE JUSTICES JUST JUMPED RIGHT
IN AND STARTED ASKING QUESTIONS
RIGHT AWAY.
>> I'M GOING TO BOIL DOWN THE
VERY LENGTHY ARGUMENT WITH
APOLOGIES TO SAY HE MADE
BASICALLY TWO ARGUMENTS HERE.
FIRST, THE LANGUAGE, EXCHANGES
ESTABLISHED BY THE STATE.
THE PLAIN LANGUAGE DICTATES A
RESULT IN FAVOR OF HIS CLIENT.
HIS SECOND ARGUMENT WAS CONGRESS
INTENDED TO LIMIT THE SUBSIDIES
TO STATE EXCHANGES IN ORDER TO
INDUCE THE STATES TO CREATE
THEIR OWN EXCHANGES.
BASICALLY, YOU DON'T CREATE THE
EXCHANGE, YOU DON'T GET THE
FEDERAL MONEY.
HIS PLAIN LANGUAGE ARGUMENT
IMMEDIATELY DREW FIRE FROM
JUSTICES BREYER, KAGAN AND
SOTOMAYOR.
KAGAN SAID IT'S NOT FAIR YOU
FOCUS ON JUST A FEW WORDS IN THE
PHRASE.
THE COURT LOOKS AT THE PHRASE IN
THE CONTEXT OF THE ENTIRE
STATUTE TO SEE IF IT'S
HARMONIOUS, IF IT MAKES SENSE.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR CLAIMED UNDER
THE ACT THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN
CONSEQUENCES CONGRESS COULD NOT
HAVE INTENDED AND, IN FACT, THE
LAW WAS DESIGNED TO AVOID.
WOULD FEDERAL SUBSIDIES ON
FEDERAL EXCHANGES, THOSE
EXCHANGES WOULD HAVE NO
CUSTOMERS.
THERE WOULD BE A DEATH SPIEMPLET
HEALTHY PEOPLE WOULDN'T BUY
INSURANCE AND INSURANCE COSTS
WOULD SKYROCKET.
>> Woodruff: WHAT WAS THE
GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE?
>> THE GOVERNMENT REPRESENTED BY
SOLICITOR GENERAL VONL VARILLI
AND HE AGREED WITH THE MORE
LIBERAL JUSTICES THAT THE
TRADITIONAL WAY TO INTERPRET A
STATUTE IS TO LOOK ALT THE
PHRASE AT ISSUE IN THE CONTEXT
OF THE ENTIRE STATUTE.
HE SAID THE CONSEQUENCES THAT
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR ENUNCIATED
CLEARLY SHOW THAT THIS WAS --
THAT THE CHALLENGES
INTERPRETATION WAS NOT THE
STATUTE CONGRESS INTENDED, BUT
HE FACED HIS TOUGHEST
QUESTIONING FROM JUSTICES SCALIA
AND ALITO.
JUSTICE SCALIA SAID IT MAY NOT
HAVE BEEN THE STATUTE CONGRESS
INTENDED BUT THE QUESTION IS THE
THE STATUTE THE CONGRESS WROTE,
AND WHERE THE LANGUAGE I UNAMBIE
COURT DOES NOT REWRITE THE
STATUTE.
>> Woodruff: YOU WERE JUST
TELLING ME, MARSIA IT LOOKS AS
IF TWO JUSTICES, IN PARTICULAR,
WILL BE THE ONES TO DETERMINE.
>> AT THE END OF THE ARGUMENT,
IT LOOKED LIKE THE DECISION
MIGHT WELL REST WITH CHIEF
JUSTICE ROBERTS WHO SAID
VIRTUALLY NOTHING DURING THE
ARGUMENT, WAS VERY QUIET, AND
JUSTICE ANTHONY KENNEDY WHO
RAISED WITH THE CHALLENGES WHAT
HE CALLED A SERIOUS
CONSTITUTIONAL PROBLEM WITH
THEIR ARGUMENT THAT THE CONGRESS
INTENDED TO INDUCE THE STATES TO
CREATE EXCHANGES BY LIMITING
SUBSIDIES TO STATE EXCHANGES.
THIS, HE SAID, COULD BE
COERCION, THE KIND OF COERCION
OF THE STATES THAT VIOLATES THE
CONSTITUTION.
SO I THINK THOSE TWO JUSTICES
ARE THE ONES THAT MAY WELL HOLD
THE BALANCE HERE.
>> Woodruff: MARCIA COYLE AT
THE COURT.
THANK YOU.
>> MY PLEASURE, JUDY.
>> Ifill: WE TAKE A BROADER LOOK
AT THE CASE NOW WITH MICHAEL
CANNON, DIRECTOR OF HEALTH
POLICY STUDIES AT THE CATO
INSTITUTE.
AND, NEERA TANDEN, PRESIDENT OF
THE CENTER FOR AMERICAN
PROGRESS.
SHE IS A FORMER SENIOR ADVISOR
TO PRESIDENT OBAMA AND HELPED
WRITE THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
LET'S GO FOR A LITTLE CONTEXT
HERE.
WAS THE ADMINISTRATION -- THE
FOUR WORDS MARCIA WAS JUST
TALKING ABOUT, PUTTING THEM INTO
THE ACTS WAS IT INTENTIONALLY
TRYING TO CONCEAL OR WAS IT AN
UNINTENTIONAL LOOPHOLE?
>> I ACTUALLY THINK IT'S NEITHER
IF YOU LOOK AT WHAT WE WERE
DELIBERATING.
THERE WERE HUNDREDS OF HOURS OF
HEARINGS, THOUSANDS OF HOURS OF
DISCUSSION IN CONGRESS ON THIS
ISSUE.
THE DEBATE WE WERE HAVING AT THE
TIME WAS ABOUT WHERE THE
EXCHANGES, THE PARAMETERS OF THE
EX CHANGES WOULD BE, AND WE WERE
DISCUSSING REGIONAL EXCHANGES
AND NATIONAL EXCHANGE AND STATE
EXCHANGES, AND THIS IS VERY
CLEAR.
THE CONCEPT WAS STATE EXCHANGE
AND THE REASON THERE WAS THE
CREATION OF THE FEDERAL FALLBACK
WAS TO HAVE SUBSIDIES AVAILABLE
TO EVERYONE REGARDLESS OF
WHETHER A STATE CHOSE TO
ESTABLISH ITS OWN EXCHANGE OR
NOT.
>> Ifill: BUT MICHAEL, WHAT IS
YOUR ARGUMENT.
>> THAT BY IMPOSING THE LAW'S
MANDATES, TAXES ON 57 MILLION
PEOPLE WHO ARE BY LAW EXEMPT AND
BY ISSUING THE DISPUTE SUBSIDIES
IN STATES WITH FEDERALLY
ESTABLISHED EXCHANGES.
THE LAW IS CLEAR.
IT SAID IN MULTIPLE STAGES
DURING THE LEGISLATIVE PROCESS
THAT THE SUBSIDIES AND TAXES
THEY TRIGGER OCCUR ONLY "THROUGH
AN EXCHANGE ESTABLISHED BY THE
STATE."
THERE'S NO SIMILAR LANGUAGE
AUTHORIZING THOSE MEASURES IN
THE FEDERAL EXCHANGES.
THE LAW IS CLEAR STATE
ESTABLISHES EXCHANGES AND WHEN
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
ESTABLISHES THE EXCHANGE IT'S
ESTABLISHED BY THE SECRETARY OF
ICES WHICH
IS NOT A STATE AND SO A CLEAR
BIFURCATION WHEN IT COMES TO THE
SUBSIDIES.
>> Ifill: JUSTICE KENNEDY, THE
ONE WHO MADE BOTH SIDES NERVOUS,
IN YOUR CASE BECAUSE HE SAID HE
WAS CONCERNED ABOUT THE IMPACT
IF SUDDENLY THE SUBSIDIES THAT
THEY MADE AVAILABLE IN A COUPLE
THREE DOZEN STATES SUDDENLY WENT
AWAY.
>> IT DOESN'T MAKE ME NERVOUS
FOR A COUPLE OF REASONS.
ONE, HE ONLY GETS TO THE
ANALYSIS IF HE AGREED WITH THE
PLAINTIFFS THAT THE TEXT OF THE
STATUTE IS CLEAR, AND IT
APPEARED HE DOES AGREE AND HE
HAD A LOT OF SKEPTICISM FOR THE
GOVERNMENT'S ARGUMENT THAT THE
COURT SHOULD DEFER TO THE I.R.S.
AS INTERPRETATION AND EXPANSION
TO HAVE THE STATUTE.
BUT EVEN IF HE FINDS THE STATUTE
IS CLEAR AND THE PLAYOFFS ARE
CORRECT, IF HE SAYS THAT'S AN
UNCONSTITUTIONALLY QUOARSIVE
CONDITION THAT CONGRESS PLACED
ON THE EXCHANGE SUBSIDIES, THAT
WOULD CREATE NEW CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW, THAT WOULD CALL INTO
QUESTION THE CONSTITUTIONALITY
OF ANY NUMBER OF PROGRAMS
INCLUDING THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.
>> Ifill: OBVIOUSLY, YOU CAN
RESPOND TO THAT BUT I ALSO WANT
YOU TO RESPOND TO JUSTICE
KENNEDY'S ABOUT I.R.S.
OVERREACH.
>> I WAS VERY HEARTENED BY
JUSTICE KENNEDY'S ARGUMENTS
BECAUSE I THINK HE ASKED
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE I.R.S., THE
SURGEON GENERAL RESPONDED
CLEARLY, BUT HE RAISED THIS
ISSUE THAT A NUMBER OF JUSTICES
FOLLOWED UP ON WHICH IS THE
CONCEPTION THAT THE PLAINTIFFS
WANT US TO BELIEVE IS THAT THE
CONGRESS PASSED A LAW THAT
BASICALLY SAID TO EVERY STATE,
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE ALL THESE
REQUIREMENTS ON INSURANCE, IF
YOU DON'T SET UP AN INSURANCE
EXCHANGE YOURSELF, YOU STILL
HAVE TO HAVE THOSE REQUIREMENTS
ON YOUR INSURERS, WHICH WILL
RAISE THE COST OF INSURANCE IN
YOUR STATE AND COULD CREATE
DEATH SPIRALS AND, ACCORDING TO
INSURERS WHO HAVE FILED, WILL
RAISE COST FORCE PEOPLE OUTSIDE
THE EXCHANGES AND, AT THE SAME
TIME, THERE WILL BE NO SUBSIDY
FOR THEM.
SO YOU'RE GOING TO LEAVE
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE HARMED IN
THESE STATES, AND ONE OF THE
MOST IMPORTANT POINTS, I THINK,
CAME OUT IN THE ASSISTANT
GENERAL'S ARGUMENTS IS NOT A
SINGLE STATE DURING THE
RULE-MAKING PROCESS NOTED,
COMPLAINED, SAID A WORD ABOUT
THIS PROBLEM BECAUSE THEY DIDN'T
SEE IT BECAUSE IT HAS BEEN,
FRANKLY, AN ARGUMENT MADE OUT
OFFWHOLE CLOTH BY JEW DURABLE
ACTIVISTS WHO HAVE NOT BEEN ABLE
TO GET THEIR CONGRESS TO PASS
BUT THEY WOULD LIKE TO HAVE
HAPPENED SO THEY USED THE
COURTS.
>> Ifill: IS THERE A
LEGISLATIVE REMEDY INSTEAD OF
THE COURTS?
>> CERTAINLY.
ONE OF THE BENEFITS OF RULING
FOR THE PLAYOFFS IN THE CASE IS
IT WILL CREATE AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR BETTER HEALTHCARE REFORMS
THAN WHAT WE'VE SEEN IN THE PAST
FIVE YEARS.
>> Ifill: YOU BASE ID ON THE
ACTION CONGRESS HAS TAKEN SO
FAR?
>> WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF THERE'S
A RULING FOR THE PLAYOFFS A LOT
OF PEOPLE WOULD SEE THE FULL
COST THE MANDATES THAT THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT IMPOSES ON
THEM AND THAT'S A LOT OF
DISSATISFACTION FOR THAT,
CAUSING IMPETUS FOR CHANGE.
A LOT OF THE PEOPLE WHO
SUPPORTED PASSAGE OF THE LAW
CONTINUE WANT THE COSTS TO BE
TRANSPARENT A, THEY WANT THE LAW
TO OPERATE ANOTHER WAY.
THEY TELL US THEY'RE HAVING
BUYER'S REMORSE, DIDN'T KNOW
WHAT WAS IN THE LAW WHEN THEY
PASSED IT, NOW THEY SEE THAT HOW
IT WORKS THEY DON'T LIKE IT ANY
MORE THAN NINE ONE ELSE, BUT NOW
THAT THERE'S PUBLIC
DISSATISFACTION, THAT CAUSES AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR REFORM.
>> Ifill: IS THIS A POLITICAL
DEBATE, THE SUPREME COURT ABOUT
THE WORTH ITSELF OF ObamaCare
AFTER THE SUPREME COURT UPHELD
IT OR IS THIS SOMETHING ELSE?
>> COULD I BRIEFLY RESPOND?
IT'S NOT THAT SOMEONE ELSE IS
DOING THIS, THE SUPREME COURT
WOULD DECIDE TO TAKE HEALTHCARE
AWAY FOR MILLIONS OF PEOPLE,
NEARLY 9 MILLION PEOPLE WOULD
LOSE HEALTHCARE COVERAGE, THAT
IS THE RESULT OF WHAT THE
SUPREME COURT WOULD DO.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE CONGRESS IN
THE LAST SEVERAL MONTHS, IT'S
HARD FOR ME TO BELIEVE THEY
WOULD DO THIS, IT'S HARD TO SEE
THIS AS A POLITICAL FIGHT.
>> IF THAT HAPPENS, THAT'S HOW
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT WORKS
AND WE SHOULD CHANGE IT.
>> Ifill: MICHAEL CANON OF
CATO AND NEERA TANDEN, CENTER
FOR AMERICAN PROGRESS.
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AFTER WEEKS OF
DELAYS, THE TRIAL OF THE BOSTON
MARATHON BOMBING SUSPECT
DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV GOT UNDER WAY
TODAY IN BOSTON.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN WITH
MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE TRIAL'S
START WAS DELAYED IN PART BY A
LONG JURY SELECTION PROCESS.
18 JURORS AND ALTERNATES WERE
ULTIMATELY SELECTED FROM A JURY
POLL OF MORE THAN 1,300.
DESPITE NUMEROUS MOTIONS TO
CHANGE VENUES, OPENING
STATEMENTS WERE FINALLY HEARD
TODAY AND IT WAS A DRAMATIC
OPENING DAY.
EMILY ROONEY OF WGBH WAS IN THE
COURTROOM AND STARTS OFF WITH
THIS REPORT.
>> Reporter: EARLY THIS MORNING
VICTIMS AND THEIR FAMILIES WERE
BUSED TO THE COURTHOUSE ON
BOSTON'S WATERFRONT, AND
ESCORTED STRAIGHT INSIDE.
THEY HAVE WAITEDOS
YEARS, AND TODAY THEY FIRST
HEARD FROM THE FEDERAL
PROSECUTOR ATTORNEY WILLIAM
WEINREB WHO SAID BOTH DZHOKHAR
TSARNAEV AND HIS BROTHER
TAMERLAN WERE TERRORISTS WHOSE
"MISSION WAS TO MAIM AND KILL."
WEINREB SAID DZHOKHAR'S COMPUTER
WAS FULL OF TERROR SCHEMES AND
INSTRUCTIONS ON HOW TO BUILD A
BOMB OUT OF A PRESSURE COOKER.
AND HE DESCRIBED IN GORY DETAIL
HOW THE THREE VICTIMS DIED
SAYING ONE BOMB TORE LARGE
CHUNKS OF FLESH OFF 8-YEAR-OLD
MARTIN RICHARD WHO WAS JUST 4'5"
WEIGHING 70 POUNDS.
SHOCKINGLY, THE DEFENSE SAID
THEY WON'T DISPUTEHE T
GOVERNMENT'S ACCOUNT OF WHAT
HAPPENED THAT DAY.
ATTORNEY JUDY CLARK SAID
DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV  WALKED DOWN
BOYLSTON STREET, CARRYING A
BACKPACK, AND PUT IT DOWN.
SHE SAID WHAT HE DID WAS
INEXCUSABLE BUT THAT HE WAS
DRAWN TO A PATH OF VIOLENCE BY
HIS OLDER BROTHER TAMERLAN, A
SPECIAL KIND OF INFLUENCE--
DICTATED BY AGE, CULTURE AND
SHEER FORCE OF PERSONALITY.
THAT WILL BE A TOUGH ARGUMENT AS
THE JURY IS REMINDED OF WHAT
STARTED ON APRIL 15, 2013.
THE WINNERS HAD FINISHED HOURS
EARLIER BUT BACK OF THE PACK
RUNNERS WERE STILL STREAMING IN
AND SPECTATORS STILL LINED THE
STREETS.
IN ADDITION TO THE THREE PEOPLE
WHO WERE KILLED, HUNDREDS MORE
WERE MAIMED AND INJURED.
THEN THE SHOOTING OF M.I.T.
POLICE OFFICER SEAN COLLIER FOUR
DAYS AFTER THE BOMBINGS
TRIGGERED A DRAMATIC MANHUNT
THAT CRIPPLED BOSTON AND
SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES.
OVER ONE MILLION RESIDENTS WERE
ORDERED TO STAY INSI, THDEE
CHASE ENDED AFTER A WILD SHOOT-
OUT IN THE BOSTON SUBURB OF
WATERTOWN WHERE TAMERLAN
TSARNAEV  WAS KILLED, RUN OVER
BY HIS OWN BROTHER DZHOKHAR AS
HE ELUDED POLICE FOR ANOTHER 20
HOURS UNTIL HE WAS DISCOVERED
HIDING IN A BOAT A FEW BLOCKS
AWAY.
MEANWHILE, THE PROJECTED FOUR-
MONTH LONG TRIAL IS GOING TO BE
A HARDSHIP FOR EVERYONE.
BETWEEN A MASSIVE CONSTRUCTION
SITE IN FRONT OF THE JOHN JOSEPH
MOAKLEY COURTHOUSE, INTENSE
SECURITY, MOUNDS OF SNOW AND A
DEARTH OF PUBLIC PARKING, JUST
MANEUVERING THE TERRAIN WILL BE
TOUGH.
SNOW WAS JUST ONE REASON FOR A
SLOW START TO THE TRIAL, BUT
TODAY WAS PROGRESS WITH ONE
VICTIM TELLING ME SIMPLY "I
COULDN'T BELIEVE IT."
>> Sreenivasan: AND EMILY JOINS
US NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: EMILY, YOU
WERE IN THE COURTHOUSE THIS
MORNING.
TELL US WHAT IT WAS LIKE IN
THERE.
THERE WERE SURVIVORS IN THE
BENCHES.
>> I WAS SITTING RIGHT ACROSS
FROM THEM AND LOOKING VERY
INTENTLY AT THEM.
AT ONE POINT THE PARENTS OF
8-YEAR-OLD RICHARD MARTIN LOOKED
OVER AND THE FATHER GOT UP
SUDDENLY AND LEFT THE COURTROOM.
I THOUGHT, WOW, THIS IS TOO
INTENSE FOR HIM BECAUSE IT WAS
RIGHT IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
OPENING STATEMENT.
HE CAME BACK, I GUESS IT WAS
JUST SORT OF AN EMERGENCY BREAK.
BUT SOME WERE VERY, VERY
INTENTLY WATCHING AND LOOKING
AND TRYING TO STRAIN TO SEE
DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV.
OTHERS WERE FOCUSED ON WHAT THE
PROSECUTION HAD TO SAY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DID
TSARNAEV LOOK LIKE?
>> HE WAS FACING POTENTIAL
JURORS AND THE MEDIA YESTERDAY.
TODAY HIS BACK TO US.
H HE LOOKS SALLOW, THIN.
HAS BUSHY BLACK HAIR, A GOATEE
HE STROKES CONSTANTLY, GIJTY,
BUT IS LAID BACK AND SEEMS
COMPLETELY DISENGAGED.
>> Sreenivasan: AS YOU
MENTIONED IN HIS REPORT, HIS
LAWYER'S STRATEGY SEEMS TO BE
NOT THAT HE DENY DOING THIS BUT
JUST TO PREVENT HIM FROM GETTING
THE DEATH PENALTY.
>> YOU COULD HAVE KNOCKED PEOPLE
OVER WITH A FEATHER WHEN JUDY
CLARKE CAME OUT AND THE FIRST
THING SHE SAID IS WE'RE NOT
GOING TO ARGUE WITH WHAT THE
GOVERNMENT HAS SAID.
HE WAS ON THERE ON BOYLSTON
STREET, PUT ON A BACKPACK LOADED
WITH BOMBS, SET THE BACKPACK
DOWN, DETONATED HIS OWN BOMB.
SHE BASICALLY MADE HIM A GUILTY
MAN.
WHAT SHE DID SAY, WE ARE GOING
TO DISPUTE THE GOVERNMENT'S
VERSION THAT HE WAS A
CO-CONSPIRATOR.
SHE IS SAYING HE WAS LED ALONG
AND THAT HIS AGE AND YOUTH
PLAYED INTO THE FACT THAT HE WAS
UNDULY INFLUENCED BY HIS BROTHER
TAMERLAN.
>> Reporter: EMILY ROONEY OF
WGBH.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS, HARI.
>> Woodruff: NOW TO THE
CHALLENGING INTERNATIONAL
MISSION TO DEFEAT THE ISLAMIC
STATE GROUP.
WE EXPLORE THE U.S.-LED
COALITION EFFORT, AND IRAN'S
ROLE IN IRAQI MILITARY
OFFENSIVES, INCLUDING THE
BIGGEST ONE TO DATE.
THE BATTLE TO RETAKE TIKRIT,
SADDAM HUSSEIN'S HOMETOWN, BEGAN
MONDAY.
>> ( translated ): OUR TROOPS
ARE NOW ADVANCING ACCORDING TO
THE DRAWN UP PLAN, THOUGH THERE
ARE SO MANY BOMBS PLANTED BY
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS TO
HINDER OUR PROGRESS.
>> Woodruff: SHIITE MILITIAMEN
HAVE JOINED THE OFFENSIVE,
DIRECTED IN PART BY A TOP
IRANIAN GENERAL.
AMERICAN WARPLANES HAVE STAYED
OUT OF THE FIGHT, BY BAGHDAD'S
CHOICE.
THE MILITANTS STILL CONTROL MUCH
OF NORTHERN AND EASTERN SYRIA
AND NORTHERN IRAQ, SEIZED LAST
SUMMER.
BUT SINCE THEN, A DOZEN NATIONS
HAVE FLOWN MORE THAN 2,000
STRIKES IN THE TWO COUNTRIES.
BACKED BY THAT AIR POWER, IRAQ'S
MILITARY HAS SLOWLY RETAKEN A
LITTLE OF WHAT IT LOST.
THE COUNTRY'S SECOND LARGEST
CITY OF MOSUL, CAPTURED LAST
JUNE, REMAINS IN THE HANDS OF
ISIS FIGHTERS.
TWO WEEKS AGO, A U.S. CENTRAL
COMMAND OFFICIAL SUGGESTED A
CAMPAIGN TO RE-TAKE MOSUL COULD
COME IN APRIL.
OTHER PENTAGON OFFICIALS
DISAGREED, INCLUDING DEFENSE
SECRETARY ASH CARTER,
YESTERDAY.
>> THAT CLEARLY WAS NEITHER
ACCURATE INFORMATION, NOR HAD IT
EN ABECCURATE, WOULD HAVE IT
BEEN INFORMATION THAT SHOULD
HAVE BEEN BLURTED OUT TO THE
PRESS.
>> Woodruff: TODAY, AN IRRITATED
IRAQI DEFENSE MINISTER SAID
BAGHDAD, AND NO ONE ELSE, WILL
DECIDE WHEN TO ATTACK MOSUL.
IN SYRIA, KURDISH MILITIA
FIGHTERS HAVE PUSHED ISIS BACK
FROM KOBANI, NEAR THE TURKISH
BORDER.
IN TURN, THE MILITANTS, ALSO
KNOWN AS ISIL, HAVE BEHEADED
HOSTAGES AND CARRIED OUT MASS
EXECUTIONS.
BUT PRESIDENT OBAMA'S SPECIAL
ENVOY TO THE COALITION, RETIRED
MARINE GENERAL JOHN ALLEN,
SAYS THE ATROCITIES WON'T WORK.
IS THAT THE SERIES OF BRUTAL
ACTS ISIL HAS BROADCAST TO THE
WORLD HAS, IN FACT, GALVANIZED
THE COALITION TO GREATER ACTION.
>> Woodruff: OVERALL, THE U.S.
MILITARY SAYS THE AIR CAMPAIGN
HAS KILLED MORE THAN 8,500
MILITANTS AND BLUNTED THEIR
MOMENTUM.
AND GENERAL ALLEN JOINS ME NOW.
>> Woodruff: WELCOME TO THE
"NewsHour".
>> GOOD TO BE WITH YOU, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: THE PENTAGON IS
SAYING THE MOMENTUM OF I.S.I.S.
HAS BEEN BLoNTED.
DOES THAT MEAN I.S.I.S. IS ON
THE DEFENSIVE OR A STANDOFF,
THAT NEITHER SIDE IS ADVANCING.
>> I THINK IT'S ON THE
DEFENSIVE.
WE ARE ADVANCING.
THERE ARE ADVANCES, THERE HAS
BEEN PROGRESS IN MANY AREAS.
THERE'S BEEN PROGRESS FROM THE
AIR IN ARRESTING ITS FORWARD
MOMENTUM AND PUTTING IT ON THE
DEFENSIVE, AS YOU HAVE DESCRIBED
IT.
THERE HAS BEEN PROGRESS IN THE
TRAINING PROCESS THAT WE HAVE
UNDERTAKEN.
THERE ARE FOUR CAMPS THAT HAVE
BEEN ESTABLISHED IN CONJUNCTION
WITH OUR IRAQI PARTNERS TO DO
TRAINING OF THE IRAQI SECURITY
FORCES AND TRIBAL ELEMENTS.
HEAVY COALITION PRESENCE IN ALL
THOSE CAMPS.
THERE HAS BEEN AN ADVISING
THAT'S OCCURRED FOR THE IRAQI
SECURITY FORCES AND SOME OF THE
TRIBAL ELEMENTS AS THEY SEEK TO
RECOVER THE GROUND AND
DELIBERATE POPULATIONS.
SO IT'S NOT JUST I.S.I.L AND
DAESH ON THE OFFENSIVE, WE'RE
SEEING MOMENTUM ON THE PART OF
THE IRAQIS.
>> Woodruff: THIS INVOLVES
SOME IRAQI TROOPS, LARGE NUMBERS
OF SHIA MILITIAMEN, IRANI
MILITARY ADVISORS -- IT DOESN'T
APPEAR THE U.S. IS DIRECTLY
INVOLVED.
IS THAT THE CASE?
SEPARATELY, ARE YOU CONCERNED
ABOUT THE HEAVY ROLE OF THE SHIA
FIGHTERS?
>> WELL, I DON'T WANT TO GET
INVOLVED OR I DON'T WANT TO
COMMENT SPECIFICALLY ON THE ROLE
HAT THE UNITED STATES MAY HAVE
IN THIS OPERATION EITHER TODAY
OR AS THIS OPERATION CONTINUES
TO UNFOLD.
WE ARE MANY CLOSE CONTACT WITH
OUR IRAQI PARTNERS RIGHT NOW, AS
WE HAVE BEEN, AND WE'LL WATCH
OWL OF THIS UNFOLD BUT BE IN
CLOSE CONTACT WITH THEM AND THE
FACT THAT IT DOES NOT APPEAR WE
EAR INVOLVED AT THIS MOMENT
DOESN'T MEAN WE WON'T BE LATER.
WE HAVE BEEN VERY CLEAR THAT,
WITH THE PRESENCE OF SHIA
ELEMENTS, THE MILITIA ELEMENTS
IN THE MILITARY ACTIVITIES
ASSOCIATASSOCIATED WITH THE LIBG
POPULATIONS, WE EXPECT THAT AS
THEY CONDUCT THESE OPERATION AND
WOULD LIBERATE THESE POPULATIONS
THAT THEY WOULD NOT TAKE REVENGE
OUT OPEN THESE POPULATIONS.
PRIME MINISTER ABADI HAS BEEN
VERY CLEAR.
THE GRAND AYATOLLAH HAS BEEN
CLEAR IN THAT REGARD.
AS THIS OPERATION AS IT HAS
UNFOLDED, THE PROVINCIAL
GOVERNOR HAS SUPPORTED THE
OPERATION AS WELL AS THE CHAIR
OF THE COUNCIL.
KEY SUNNI SHEIKHS FROM VARIOUS
TRIBES HAVE BEEN SUPPORTIVE OF
THE OPERATION.
SO AS IT HAS UNFOLDED TO THIS
PARTICULAR MOMENT, THE ACTIONS
OF THE FORCES INVOLVED HERE HAVE
BEEN ABOUT CLEARING DAESH AND WE
WOULD CONDEMN INSTANTLY ANY
RETRIBUTION OR ANY REVENGE BEING
TAKEN OUT ON THE POPULATION.
>> Woodruff: JUST BY YOUR
MAKING THAT POINT, SOUNDS LIKE
YOU'RE CONCERNED ABOUT THAT AND
I KNOW VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN
SPOKE TODAY WITH ABADI AND MADE
A POINT ABOUT SPEAKING AND
MAKING SURE THAT THE POPULATIONS
WHOO ARE LIBERATED ARE
REINTEGRATED BACK INTO SOCIETY.
>> THAN IMPORTANT OUTCOME.
IN EACH ONE OF THE OCCASIONS IN
WHICH POPULATIONS WILL BE
LIBERATED, EMBRACING THE
POPULATION AND REINCORPORATING
THE POPULATION FROM BEING UNDER
THE HEEL OF DAESH OR I.S.I.L
BACK INTO THE MAIN STREAM OF
SOCIETY AND INTO THE BROADER OF
CONCEPT OF IRAQ IS IMPORTANT.
IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT TO MAKE THE
POINT THIS IS NOT JUST ABOUT THE
CLEARING FORCE.
WE SEE CLEARING FORCES AT WORK
RIGHT NOW.
WHAT WILL BE EQUALLY IF PERHAPS
MORE IMPORTANT WILL BE THE ROLE
OF THE POLICE WHICH WILL
PROBABLY EMERGE FROM THE LOCAL
POPULATIONS, SO THERE WE'LL SEE
THE ROLE OF SUNNI SECURITY
ELEMENTS IN SECURING THAT
LIBERATED POPULATION.
IT WILL BE THE GOVERNANCE
ELEMENT WHICH RECONNECTS THAT
POPULATION BACK TO THE CENTRAL
GOVERNMENT, AND VERY
IMPORTANTLY, PERHAPS MOST
IMPORTANTLY, HOW WE PROVIDE
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE AND
RELIEF AND IMMEDIATE CARE FOR
THE LIBERATED POPULATION, ALL
THOSE TOGETHER.
>> Woodruff: NOT ONLY IRANIAN
MILITARY ADVISORS ARE PART OF
THE EFFORT TO RETAKE.
MULTIPLE REPORTS, IT'S AN
IRANIAN GENERAL WHO OVERSEES THE
ELITE REVOLUTIONARY GUARD FORCE
WHO IS DIRECTING THIS MILITARY
EFFORT.
IS THAT ACCURATE AND DOES THE
U.S. COORDINATE WITH HIM?
>> WE DON'T COORDINATE WITH
IRANIANS OR -- WE HAVE SEEN THE
REPORTS.
WE HAVE NO SPECIFIC INFORMATION
HIS PRESENCE IS A PRESENCE THAT
IS LEADING THE PROCESS.
THIS IS AN IRAQI PROCESS AND THE
IRAQIS HAVE BEEN VERY CLEAR THAT
TAKING BACK THESE POPULATION
CENTERS ARE GOING TO BE ABIRAQI
EFFORT.
NOW, AGAI WE SHOULDN'T BE
SURPRISED THAT THERE'S GOING TO
BE AN IRANIAN ELEMENT FROM TIME
TO TIME THAT WILL BE INVOLVED
HERE.
BUT THIS IS AN IRAQI-LED AND
EXECUTED EVOLUTION.
>> Woodruff: IS IRAN PLAYING A
HELPFUL ROLE IN THAT IT IS PART
OF THE FIGHT AGAINST I.S.I.S.?
>> WE HAVE SAID FROM THE
BEGINNING WE WELCOME THE
CONSTRUCTIVE ROLE OF ALL
PARTICIPANTS IN THIS BATTLE AND
IRAN PERCEIVES DAESH OR I.S.I.L
TO BE AS GREAT A THREAT TO ITS
OWN SECURITY AS IRAQ DOES AND
PRIME MINISTER ABADI HAS BEEN
CLEAR THAT HE DESIRES A GOOD
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE UNITED
STATES AND HIS NEIGHBORS AND
SEEKS TO BALANCE THAT AND WE
SHOULD GIVE HIM THAT
OPPORTUNITY.
>> Woodruff: TWO OTHER QUICK
QUESTIONS, YOU SAID A BIG PART
OF YOUR GOAL IS TO STOP OR
REDUCE THE FLOW OF FOREIGN
FIGHTERS INTO THE AREA.
HAVE YOU HAD SUCCESS IN DOING
THAT?
>> AT THIS POINT, THE FOREIGN
FIGHTERS ARE STILL FLOWING INTO
THE BATTLE SPACE INTO SYRIA AND
IRAQ.
THE ACTIVITIES THAT WE ARE
UNDERTAKING IN OUR PARTNERSHIP
WITH OUR COALITION PARTNERS
SEEKING TO DO EVERYTHING FROM
BROADER COMMUNITY OUTREACH TO
POTENTIALLY AT-RISK POPULATIONS
THAT COULD GENERATE THESE
FOREIGN FIGHTERS, THESE RECRUITS
TO INCREASING OUR COOPERATION
WITH THE SHARING OF INTELLIGENCE
AND TIGHTENING BORDER CONTROLS.
SO WE'RE TAKING CONCERTED ACTION
ACROSS THE COALITION TO STAUNCH
THE FLOW OF FOREIGN FIGHTERS.
IT HASN'T OCCURRED YET.
MORE WORK NEEDS TO BE DONE.
BUT WE'RE, I THINK, IN A GOOD
POSITION TO START TO BUILD
MOMENTUM TOWARDS THAT END.
>> Woodruff: SYRIA RIGHT NOW
THE U.S. FOCUS AGAINST I.S.I.S.
IS CLEARLY MAINLY IN IRAQ.
IN SYRIA, YOU YOURSELF HAVE SAID
IT'S MORE COMPLICATED.
WE KNOW THAT THE COALITION IS
DIVIDED IN SYRIA, DIVIDED AMONG
ITSELF.
SOME OF THE COALITION PARTNERS
WANT THE FOCUS TO BE MORE ON
PRESIDENT ASSAD.
THE U.S. WANTS THE FOCUS TO BE
ON I.S.I.S.
DOESN'T THIS MAKE PROGRESS IN
SYRIA ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE?
>> I THINK WE'RE ALL OF ONE MINN
ENTITY.
WE DON'T SEE DAESH SOLELY AS A
SYRIAN ENTITY OR AS AN IRAQI
ENTITY.
WE SEE DAESH OR I.S.I.L AS A
REGIONAL THREAT.
SO WHILE WE'LL TAKE CONCERTED
ACTION NOW IN IRAQ BECAUSE WE
HAVE A STRONG PARTNER IN IRAQ,
WE'LL HAVE TO BUILD THAT
PARTNERSHIP OVER TIME TO DEAL
WITH I.S.I.L IN SYRIA.
THE THE SOLUTION TO SYRIA WILL
NEVER BE SOLVED BY MILITARY
MEANS.
IT HAS TO REQUIRE A POLITICAL
DIPLOMATIC TRACK AND WE'RE
SEEKING THAT DIPLOMATIC TRACK.
BUT AT THE END OF THE PROCESS OF
THE POLITICAL TRANSITION IN
SYRIA, BASHAR AL-ASSAD WILL NOT
BE PART OF THAT AND I THINK THE
COALITION MEMBERS ARE OF ONE
MIND ON THAT ISSUE.
IT'S THE MODALITIES OF HOW TO
GET THERE THAT WE WOULD HAVE A
DIFFERENT DISCUSSION.
>> Woodruff: GENERAL JOHN
ALLEN, THANKS FOR TALKING WITH
US.
>> GOOD TO SEE YOU.
THANK YOU FOR LET MEG BE ON
TONIGHT.
>> Ifill: AFTER SERVING IN IRAQ
AND AFGHANISTAN, MANY VETERANS
FACE AN UPHILL CHALLENGE IN
FINDING WORK IN CIVILIAN LIFE.
THERE'S BEEN AN INCREASE IN
PROGRAMS TO HELP EASE THEIR
TRANSITION, BUT ONE SEGMENT OF
THE VET POPULATION IS OFTEN
OVERLOOKED.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT GAYLE
TZEMACH LEMMON REPORTS.
>> Reporter: KATRINA HOLLEY
FINDS SATISFACTION IN BRINGING
ORDER TO PEOPLE'S LIVES.
>> EVER SINCE I WAS IN 4TH GRADE
I LOVED CLEANING HOUSE.
>> Reporter: HER ATTENTION TO
DETAIL IS JUST ONE OF THE SKILLS
SHE HONED DURING 11 YEARS IN THE
AIR FORCE.
HOLLEY'S SMALL BUSINESS IN
HILLSBOROUGH, NORTH CAROLINA
CLEANING HOMES CALLS ON SOME OF
THOSE SKILLS, BUT FOR YEARS
SHE'S SOUGHT A CIVILIAN CAREER
THAT BETTER VALUES HER MILITARY
EXPERIENCE-- A BACKGROUND THAT
OFTEN CATCHES HER CLIENTS OFF
GUARD.
>> SO OFTEN PEOPLE ARE SURPRISED
BECAUSE THEY DON'T THINK ABOUT
FEMALE VETERANS, WE ARE COMING
MORE INTO THE LIGHT IN 2014 AND
2015 AND AFTER IRAQ OF COURSE
BUT I THINK IT IS INTERESTING
BECAUSE IT ADDS SUCH DIVERSITY
TO YOUR LIFE.
THAT EXPERIENCE IS SOMETHING
THAT I VALUE SO HIGHLY.
>> Reporter: THE ANSITRTION TO A
CIVILIAN CAREER MAY BE MOST
PROBLEMATIC FOR FEMALE VETERANS
LIKE HOLLEY, WHO FACE THE
GREATEST CHALLENGE IN THE JOB
MARKET.
FEMALE VETERAN UNEMPLOYMENT
RATES ARE HIGHER THAN CIVILIAN
WOMEN'S, AND A FULL 20% ABOVE
THEIR MALE VETERAN COUNTERPARTS.
MORE THAN 150,000 WOMEN HAVE
SERVED IN IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN,
YET VETERAN SERVICES HAVE NOT
FULLY CAUGHT UP WITH WOMEN'S
NEEDS, LEAVING THOSE VETS WHO DO
SEEK HELP ONCE THEY RETURN TO
CIVILIAN LIFE OFTEN FIND THE
SUPPORT THEY NEED IS NOT YET
THERE.
A PILOT PROGRAM HERE IN NORTH
CAROLINA BACKED BY COMPUTER
MAKER LENOVO AND RUN BY THE NON-
PROFIT "DRESS FOR SUCCESS" HOPES
TO HELP CHANGE THAT.
IT AIMS TO HELP FEMALE VETERANS
LOOK AND FEEL THEIR BEST IN JOB
INTERVIEWS.
FOR HOLLEY, DRESS FOR SUCCESS IS
A CHANCE TO GET A NEW UNIFORM
FOR A NEW MISSION.
>> I LIKE DRESSES.
>> Reporter: DRESS FOR SUCCESS
STARTED BY ORGANIZING A
ROUNDTABLE TO UNDERSTAND THESE
FORMER SERVICE MEMBERS' NEEDS.
>> THE MORE INFORMATION YOU
SHARE WITH US, THE BETTER WE
WILL BE ABLE TO DEVELOP PROGRAMS
THAT FIT YOUR NEEDS.
>> CONVERTING WHAT YOU DID IN
THE MILITARY TO THE ENGLISH THAT
IS SPOKEN OUT IN THE CIVILIAN
WORLD, THAT WAS PROBABLY THE
MOST DIFFICULT.
>> I DID HAVE ONE PERSON WHO
HIRED ME BECAUSE WHEN SHE FOUND
OUT I MADE BOMBS.
SHE WAS LIKE, THAT WAS COOL, AND
THAT IS HOW I GOT STARTED
WORKING AS A LOBBYIST AND WHAT I
AM DOING TODAY.
JUST BECAUSE ONE WOMAN THOUGHT
IT WAS NEAT.
>> Reporter: SOME OF THESE
VETERANS WHO HAVE SUCCESSFULLY
MADE THE SHIFT TO CIVILIAN LIFE
NOW HELP MENTOR OTHER WOMEN.
BEEY KNOW THE ROAD BACK CAN
ROUGH.
>> THEY ARE NOT MAKING ENOUGH
MONEY, THEY ARE NOT FINDING THE
JOBS THEY NEED, THEIR SKILLS ARE
NOT TRANSLATABLE, OR THEY DON'T
KNOW HOW TO TRANSLATE THEM, NDA
SOME OF THEM ARE KIND OF SHELL-
SHOCKED.
>> Reporter: AT ANOTHER
GATHERING OF FEMALE VETERANS
NEAR WASHINGTON, D.C., THE BOND
OF A SISTERHOOD FORMED IN
SERVICE IS JUST AS STRONG.
BUT THESE WOMEN HAVE SOMETHING
OTHER THAN YEARS IN UNIFORM IN
COMMON: ALL HAVE BEEN HOMELESS
AFTER STRUGGLING TO FIND WORK.
>> THAT FIRST TWO TO THREE YEARS
AFTER GETTING OUT WAS THE WORST.
I COULDN'T FIND A JOB, I WAS
SCARED TO TELL PEOPLE I HAD JUST
GOTTEN OUT OF THE MILITARY
BECAUSE I DIDN'T KNOW IF THAT
WAS THE REASON WHY THEY WEREN'T
HIRING ME BECAUSE THEY THOUGHT I
PROBABLY HAD PTSD OR SOMETHING.
IT WAS SO HARD.
>> Reporter: FOUR YEARS AGO JAS
BOOTHE FOUNDED FINAL SALUTE,
WHICH OFFERS HOUSING AND
SERVICES TO WOMEN VETS.
AN ARMY VETERAN, BOOTHE LIVED
OUT OF HER CAR AFTER BEING
DIAGNOSED WITH CANCER AND LOSING
HER HOME IN HURRICANE KATRINA.
SHE SAYS AMERICA IS FAILING ITS
FEMALE VETERANS.
>> I TOOK AN OATH TO NEVER LEAVE
A FALLEN COMRADE.
THIS IS WHY I AM DOING THIS.
I AM DOING THIS IN RESPONSE TO
THE LACK OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
BEING INVOLVED.
>> Reporter: DEMAND FOR ROOMS AT
FINAL SALUTE FAR OUTSTRIPS WHAT
BOOTHE CAN PROVIDE.
FEMALE VETERANS ARE AT LEAST
TWICE AS LIKELY TO BE HOMELESS
AS WOMEN WHO NEVER WORE A
UNIFORM.
SALANIKA IS A NAVY VETERAN WHO
FOUND HERSELF TRAPPED IN A
MARRIAGE FILLED WITH VIOLENCE
AND ABUSE.
>> AND I TRIED TO HOLD THE
LIFESTYLE BY MYSELF, MY
APARTMENT, THE KIDS
INDEPENDENTLY,
>> Reporter: SHE LIVED OUT OF
HER CAR BEFORE FINDING A HAVEN
HERE.
SHE NOW WORKS FULL-TIME AND
TAKES A FULL COLLEGE COURSE LOAD
AS SHE FIGHTS TO GET BACK ON
TRACK.
>> LIFE IS GOOD BUT IT IS JUST
BUSY AND IF IT WASN'T FOR JAS
AND FINAL SALUTE I DON'T KNOW
WHERE I WOULD BE RIGHT NOW.
>> Reporter: FINAL SALUTE WAS
CHIQUITA'S ONLY HOME BEFORE
HEADING TO WAR.
SO YOU DEPLOYED TO SERVE AMERICA
IN AFGHANISTAN FROM A HOUSE FOR
HOMELESS VETERANS?
>> I DID.
>> Reporte SO r:YOU WERE
HOMELESS THE EVENING BEFORE YOU
DEPLOYED?
>> BOOTS ON THE GROUND FROM HERE
TO TRAINING.
>> Reporter: BOOTHE SAYS THE
SOLUTION CANNOT JUST BE LEFT TO
THE MILITARY.
>> IT WASN'T THE MILITARY'S JOB
TO TEACH ME TO BE A CIVILIAN.
AMERICAN IS SUPPOSED TO WELCOME
ME WITH OPEN ARMS AND HELP ME
INCORPORATE BACK INTO CIVILIAN
SOCIETY.
>> Reporter: IN NORTH CAROLINA
THAT PUSH TO HELP WOMEN VETERANS
SUCCEED IN THE CIVILIAN WORLD
CONTINUES.
FOR HOLLEY, WHO IS FEELING READY
TO TACKLE THE CHALLENGE OF
GROWING HER BUSINESS.
A NEW SUIT IS JUST PART OF A NEW
START.
>> NOW I JUST FEEL PART OF
SOMETHING BIGGER, PART OF
SOMETHING IMPORTANT, PART OF
SOMETHING THAT IS MOTIVATING AND
SUPPORTING AND NURTURING AND
THOSE ARE IMPORTANT THINGS TO
ME.
>> Reporter: FOR PBS THE
NEWSHOUR I'M GAYLE TZEMACH
LEMMON IN RALEIGH-DURHAM NORTH
CAROLINA.
>> Woodruff: STAY WITH US,
WE'LL BE BACK WITH THE
CONTROVERSY SURROUNDING HILLARY
CLINTON'S EMAILS WHILE SECRETARY
OF STATE.
BUT FIRST, IT'S PLEDGE WEEK ON
PBS.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATION TO ASK FOR
YOUR SUPPORT.
AND THAT SUPPORT HELPS KEEP
PROGRAMS LIKE OURS ON THE AIR.
>> Ifill: SHE'S NOT OFFICIALLY
IN THE PRESIDENTIAL RACE YET,
BUT HILLARY CLINTON IS UNDER
TOUGH NEW SCRUTINY THIS WEEK,
AFTER REVELATIONS THAT SHE
RELIED EXCLUSIVELY ON A PRIVATE,
NOT GOVERNMENT, EMAIL ACCOUNT,
OPERATED FROM A PERSONAL SERVER,
WHEN SHE SERVED AS SECRETARY OF
STATE.
TODAY, A HOUSE OVERSIGHT
COMMITTEE IS NOW MOVING TO
SUBPOENA THOSE EMAILS FOR AN
ONGOING BENGHAZI INVESTIGATION.
"THE WALL STREET JOURNAL"'S
LAURA MECKLER HAS BEEN COVERING
THE STORY.
LAURA, HOW UNUSUAL IS IT THAT
ANY SECRETARY OF STATE WOULD BE
USING A PERSONAL EMAIL ACCOUNT
EXCLUSIVELY?
>> WELL, IT WASN'T THAT UNUSUAL,
FRANKLY, BECAUSE THERE HAVEN'T
BEEN THAT MANY SECRETARIES OF
STATE SINCE EMAIL BECAME THE
NORMAL WAY TO COMMUNICATE IN
BUSINESS.
SECRETARY POWELL USE ADD
PERSONAL ACCOUNT HIS STAFF
CONFIRMED.
SECRETARY RICE DIDN'T USE EMAIL,
THEN WE HAD SECRETARY CLINTON.
SECRETARY KERRY USE AS REGULAR
STATE DEPARTMENT EMAIL ADDRESS
HIMSELF.
>> Ifill: EXCLUSIVELY WITHOUT
ANY OTHER .gov ADDRESS
INVOLVED?
>> SECRETARY CLINTON JUST USED
HER PERSONAL EMAIL ADDRESS.
SECRETARY POWELL DID JUST USE A
PERSONAL EMAIL AS WELL.
>> Ifill: TO HAVE YOUR OWN
PERSONAL SERVER THEY CALL HOME
BREW WHICH IS CONNECTED TO HER
HOME IN CHA CHAPA QUO, ACTUALLYW
MUCH DOES THIS KEEP PUBLIC
BUSINESS PRIVATE?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT'S THE REAL
QUESTION HERE.
I THINK YOU PUT THE FINGER ON
IT.
THE QUESTION IS WHY DOES SHE
HAVE NOT ONLY HER OWN EMAIL
ADDRESS AND NOT JUST GET THE ONE
ASSIGNED YOU AT WORK LIKE THE
REST OF US DO, BUT WHY DID SHE
TAKE THE ADDITIONAL STEP TO SET
UP HER OWN NETWORK?
JEB BUSH ALSO USE ADD PERSONAL
EMAIL ADDRESS AND ALSO OWNED HIS
OWN SERVERS AS WELL BUT IN HIS
CASE HE WAS REGULARLY TURNING
THEM OVER TO THE STATE, SO THERE
WAS A OF HILLARY CLINTON,
SHE DIDN'T TURN ANY OVER FOR
PUBLIC EXAMINATION UNTIL AFTER
SHE LEFT OFFICE AND RECEIVED A
REQUEST.
>> Ifill: THAT'S THE QUESTION.
THE BENGHAZI INVESTIGATION WAS
GOING ON FOR A WHILE.
WHY ARE WE NOW JUST HEARING
ABOUT THE EXISTENCE OF THE
PRIVATE ACCOUNT?
>> I DON'T THINK PEOPLE KNEW
THAT WAS THE CASE.
IT CAME OUT THROUGH THE
COMMITTEE'S INVESTIGATION WHEN
THEY REQUESTED THE EMAIL.
THE STATE DEPARTMENT REQUESTED
THE E-MAILS AS A ROUTINE EFFORT
TO REQUIRE WITH FEDERAL RECORDS
KEEPING REQUIREMENTS SO THEY
ASKED FOR ALL HER E-MAILS THEN
SUBSEQUENTLY TURNED SOME OVER TO
THE HOUSE COMMITTEE.
SO SOME OF THIS IS SORT OF BEING
DONE IN THE QUASI NORMAL COURSE
OF EVENTS BUT DOES RAISE
QUESTIONS ON WHY IT TOOK SO LONG
AFTER SHE LEFT OFFICE TO TURN
THESE OVER.
THESE ARE THE PUBLIC BUSINESS
AND ALL SORTS OF PEOPLE HAVE
INTEREST, NOT JUST THE HOUSE,
BUT KNOWING FOR HISTORICAL AND
EVERY DAY PURPOSES AND WHAT SHE
WAS DOING AND HOW SHE WAS
CONDUCTING HER JOB.
>> Ifill: WHEN SHE WAS IN
COMMUNICATION WITH STATE
DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES, SHE
ASSUMED THEY WOULD BE ARCHIVED
ON THEIR ACCOUNTS.
SO WHAT ARE THE RULES AND WHERE
IS THE BRIGHT LINE?
>> THAT DOESN'T REALLY SEEM TO
COVER IT BECAUSE ALL OF US EMAIL
PEOPLE BOTH AT OUR ORGANIZATION
AND OUTSIDE OUR ORGANIZATION,
SO, YES, THAT'S TRUE BUT ONLY A
SMALL PART OF THE E-MAILS SHE
WOULD SEND ON ANY GIVEN DAY,
PRESUMABLY.
BUT THE RULES THAT WERE IN PLACE
WHEN SHE WAS SECRETARY ARE
DIFFERENT THAN THE ONES IN PLACE
NOW.
THEY SAID YOU CAN ESSENTIALLY
HAVE A PERSONAL EMAIL ACCOUNT
BUT THEY HAVE TO BE PRESERVED.
THERE WEREN'T SPECIFICATIONS
ABOUT WHEN THEY WERE PRESERVED
AND HOW THEY SHOULD BE
PRESERVED.
THEY'VE GOTTEN MORE DETAILED
ABOUT THAT NOW.
WE'RE TOLD BY OTHER PEOPLE WHO
WORKED IN THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION, IT WAS MADE
CLEAR FROM THE BEGINNING THIS
WAS NOT THE WAY TO DO THINGS,
THEY SHOULD BE USING OFFICIAL
GOVERNMENT EMAIL FOR OFFICIAL
GOVERNMENT WORK.
>> COMBINE WITH THE FOREIGN
DONORS WHO GAVE MONEY TO THE
CLINTON FOUNDATION, NOW THIS, IS
SHE UNDER MORE INTENSE SCRUTINY
AS PEOPLE ARE WAITING FOR HER TO
ANNOUNCE SHE'S RUNNING FOR
PRESIDENT?
>> I THINK SHE IS.
I THINK BOTH OF THE QUESTIONS
SORT OF FEED INTO A LONG-TIME
STORY LINE ABOUT THE CLINTSENS
BEING A LITTLE TOO SECRETIVE,
PLAYING A LITTLE AGAINST THE
RULES TOO MUCH OR MAYBE SKIRTING
THE RULES IS A BETTER WAY TO PUT
IT, RIGHT ALONGSIDE IT, BARELY
LEGAL.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT'S
TECHNICALLY TRUE IN EITHER OF
THESE CASES BUT IN BOTH CASES IT
DOES RAISE QUESTIONS AND IT'S AN
INTERESTING SITUATION WHERE
SHE'S NOT OFFICIALLY A
CANDIDATE.
IN FACT SHE HASN'T EVEN SAID
SHE'S IN THE RUNNING, SO SHE
DOESN'T HAVE A CAMPAIGN
RESPONDING TO THIS.
A LOT OF DEMOCRATS ARE
FRUSTRATED.
THEY FEEL LIKE THEY DON'T HAVE
THE INFORMATION TO DEFEND HER
AND SOME OF THEM DON'T FEEL LIKE
DEFENDING SOME OF THESE THINGS.
IT'S TOUGH.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE WATCHING.
LAURA MECKLER OF THE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL."
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YO.U
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
STORY OF THE DAY.
A DIVIDED SUPREME COURT
CONSIDERED WHETHER TAX SUBSIDIES
IN THE HEALTH CARE LAW WILL
APPLY IN ALL STATES, OR ONLY IN
THOSE WITH THEIR OWN EXCHANGES.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, A LIBERAL ARTS COLLEGE
THAT HAS BEEN EDUCATING WOMEN
FOR NEARLY 114 YEARS WILL CLOSE
ITS DOORS THIS SUMMER.
SWEET BRIAR COLLEGE, LOCATED IN
THE FOOTHILLS OF VIRGINIA'S BLUE
RIDGE MOUNTAINS, WILL OFFER ITS
LAST CLASS AFTER THIS SEMESTER.
SEE WHAT LED TO THE DRASTIC
DECISION.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM INSIDE
HIGHER ED, ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE,
AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.